all right I looked at the agenda and it
looks like I'm either in your lunch or
I'm between you and having lunch so
let's let's try to stick to the schedule
here welcome to this talk talk is called
let's refresh our memory memory
management in dotnet and if you are here
for the really in-depth hardcore stuff
then I'm sorry I will have to disappoint
you the idea of this talk is to refresh
your memory about memory management in
nets and to look at a couple of things
that may matter in your applications but
the good news is that the agenda has a
couple of really deep dive talks that
continue to build on the stuff that I
will be talking about and Martin bio
I work for JetBrains and I flew in from
Belgium and yeah let's dive in so if we
look at the dotnet runtime and you have
your application that you're building
and you want to run your application
you'll see that net runtime there's a
lot of things for us it basically runs
our application it does just-in-time
compilation converting the intermediate
language codes of our application to
something that can run on the CPU in
your on your computer
it handles type safety so that you can
actually work with different types and
ensure that something is a string
something is a person class or an
address class etc it does exception
handling and so on and we're not going
to cover those things we will just cover
the thing that's it does really well in
that is memory management's and garbage
collection in the.net runtime so if you
look at memory management and the
garbage collector in Donuts you'll see
that its goal is basically to give you
virtually unlimited memory in your
application it does that by when you
start your application it does that by
reserving a big chunk of memory for your
net application so that's whenever you
want to allocate something in your
application you don't have to go to the
operating system and ask for more memory
to allocate the variables that you want
to have there instead it allocates a big
chunk of memory and whenever you
allocate something in Donuts that will
be stored in this big chunk of memory
called the managed heap now virtually
unlimited means that whenever something
is no long
being used the garbage collector will
run and remove the objects that were
stored in this big heap so to free it up
and make it available for future
allocations again so it frees that up
and makes it available and gives you the
impression that memory is unlimited and
you can store whatever you want in in
that managed heap now if you look at
memory allocation those things go in the
managed heap and allocating memory in
that managed heap is really really fast
the reason for that is that dotnet
doesn't have to go to the operating
system again reason is that it can just
allocate a pointer in this big heap and
then allocate your object and make it
available in there of course if you
attach a profiler to any dotnet process
you will see there's this big chunk of
managed memory that it allocates but
there's also some unmanaged memory being
allocated where it stores graphics
buffers and whatever is needed to make
your application run but will not dive
into that one in this talk now at any
point in time the garbage collector may
run and it may release the objects that
are no longer in use by your application
so what will happen is that the garbage
collector pauses your application looks
at all the objects that are in memory
analyzes the graph and looks at which
objects are still in use and if the
object is no longer in use if it's
unreachable from any other objects it
will be marked for removal and remove
from memory eventually and what will
also happen is that the garbage
collector will compact that memory so if
you think of defragmentation on your
hard drive for example what the garbage
collector will do is defragment your
memory space as well so that whenever
you want to allocate something there's
always a big chunk of memory available
where it can just have one stream of
bytes available to store the things that
you want to store in there now the
problem with garbage collection is that
it takes time to scan all the objects
that are in memory so the garbage
collector will have to pause your
application and scan all the objects
that are in memory see if they are still
in use and that may take some time
the bigger the chunk of managed memory
that is available or made available to
your application the longer this time
will take of course so that's not ideal
so Microsoft came up in dotnet with the
idea of splitting this big managed heap
into generations
whenever you first allocate something in
memory that's that allocation will be
done in generation zero just a part of
this managed heap
whenever the variable that you allocated
goes out of scope it is no longer
reachable and when the garbage collector
runs it may remove it from memory if
needed so if you have short-lived
objects imagine a function call or a
function where you have an allocation
and at the end you return well that's a
short-lived object and the object may go
out of memory after deaths so whenever
you allocate something in nets it goes
into generation zero first when the
garbage collector runs and decides that
the object is still in use the object
will be moved to generation one if no
longer in use it will go out of memory
in the memory will be made available
again same thing happens in generation
one when the garbage collector runs on
generation one it will check is the
object still in use if it is it will
move to generation two if not it will go
out of memory again same thing happens
when the garbage collector runs on
generation two if it's still in use it
will just stay in generation two if no
longer in use the memory will be
reclaimed and made available again
there's actually a fourth generation and
that fourth generation is called the
large object heap this is where big
objects go if you have a huge array that
contains lots of strings or person
objects or whatever object that you have
in your application those will typically
go in the large object heap those are
only collected so the garbage collector
runs on the large object heap as well
but they're only collected if all
generations are being collected at some
point so garbage collection runs less
frequently on the large object heap by
default the large object heap is also
not being compacted so the
defragmentation process that exists
there is not always being run by
defaults on the large object heap and
that means if you have to allocate a big
object again in this large object heap
eventually you may run into an out of
memory exception and that out of memory
exception may be a lie in some case
because there is still still memory
available but there's just not a big
enough region of memory available to
store the objects so if you have big
objects and so on you may want to tweak
the garbage collector settings to also
do
action on that one to avoid this type of
out of memory exceptions in that case
now the garbage collector runs really
often for generation zero because
whenever you allocate something there's
a big chance that's after a couple of
lines of code or in between two garbage
collections the object will be
unreachable and can be removed from
memory on the higher generations it runs
less frequently and reason for that is
if it's on a higher generation the
chances that the object is still being
referenced somewhere are much bigger and
hence it will take longer to scan the
entire object route or object graph and
check if the object is actually still
being used or not now that's all fine
the only issue is that on the higher
generations because the object tree will
be larger garbage collection will take a
little bit longer and also that is not a
real problem except when it becomes a
problem I've seen generation two garbage
collections with big object trees and so
on where garbage collection would take a
couple of seconds and even up to a
couple of minutes I've seen in some
applications and that could be no
problem but it could be a problem as
well because when the garbage collector
runs it pauses your application or in
future garbage collectors where
background garbage collection happens it
pauses just a couple of threads but
still part of your application may be
paused when garbage collection is
running and not be serving whoever is
using the application so imagine you
have a web application and you have a
garbage collection of a couple of
seconds that means that during those
couple of seconds no garbage or no
requests will be processed and your
application will seem to hang so that's
not ideal and that's why we want to help
out the garbage collector a little bit
about being smarter and having to run
less frequently or at least less long to
scan all the objects that are in the
object tree there now when does it run I
have still to encounter a document that
really documents all the different
points where the garbage collector runs
but people have been experimenting and
looking into the garbage collector and
typically it runs on out of memory
conditions where no memory is available
its first try to reclaim some memory see
some memory is available when you do
significant allocations that's also
typically when the garbage collector
will run and that's a really important
one because if you allocate lots and
lots and lots of variables in your
application chances are really high that
the garbage collector will run
immediately after that and may pause
your application at endpoints of course
there's some other places where the
garbage collector may run as well you
can force it by calling GC collects you
can attach a profiler and let the
profiler do a garbage collection and so
on but still probably the most important
one here is after you do a significant
allocation or when there's no memory
available and it should check if memory
can be made available now one important
one also is that the garbage collector
is not guaranteed to run so if you have
a big application and none of these
conditions really happen in your
application it could well be that the
garbage collector doesn't even run now
in case you want to see or discover when
the garbage collector runs there is
actually the source code of the garbage
collector is available online so if you
go to github you will see that it's
available and it's I think it's about
60,000 lines of codes or 40,000 lines of
codes of C++ codes so if you find when
it really runs in what the real
conditions are for the garbage collector
to run and I'll keep scrolling please
tell me I would like to notice also if
you want to write your own garbage
collector in dotnet core you can
actually replace the garbage collector
so this could be a good starting point
to write your own one if you want rights
so having seen all those things we
probably want to optimize our
application a little bit and we want to
make sure that garbage collection either
doesn't have to happen so many often so
many times or thats garbage collection
takes less time to basically shorten
those pauses that's the garbage
collector will make one way of doing
that could be optimizing our allocations
using structs when it makes sense using
the new span of these stacking locks
object pooling things like that that's
one way of doing it the problem there is
that a lot of those cases where you
think it could
since may actually shoot you in the foot
later on because you're allocating on
the stack and no longer on this
automatically managed heap in dotnet but
still if you know what you're doing that
could be one way of having less stress
on the garbage collector another one
could be to make use of a disposable and
using statements to optimize cleaning up
things and basically telling the dotnet
runtime that you have already manually
cleaned up some of the things that your
object has referenced to make it easier
for the garbage collector to run
everything there another thing you could
do is make use of weak references in
your code where you basically have an
object that points to another objects
but when the garbage collector runs it
may clean up that reference by itself
you're basically telling the garbage
collector that's the object that you are
referencing it can clean it up at any
time and I will take care of reinstating
the object whenever it is needed another
option is implementing finalized errs on
your objects and basically do the
cleanup yourself so that the garbage
collector no longer has to do this but
beware because that's the last point
where you can actually run some cleanup
steps so if you have a memory leak in
your finalizar
the memory will always leak and never be
reclaimed again and you're actually
making things worse so beware of those
now let's look at one example where we
can help the garbage collector and this
is going to be interesting because I'm
looking down there I have an application
here and by the way if you look at this
github repo you can find all the demos
that I'll be doing during this talk you
can find them on there with comments on
what to do and what to profile and so on
so feel free to do that when you're back
home so I have a class here in my
project and that class is a sample
disposable now for a minute forgets the
fact that it's disposable so imagine
it's built like this and my class has a
file stream that it's references and it
has an integer pointer that it
references now what would happen if I
would allocates let's go to that methods
what will happen if I allocate 10,000
objects and then expect the garbage
collector to clean them up so my code
here is create a new list of samples
bobbles that are not disposable at
10,000 of those into memory then at some
point cleared those objects from our
clear that list and expect them to go
away and run garbage collection I would
expect that in this case my sample
disposables are cleaned up well turns
out if we profile this application we
get a really nice snapshot real nice
profile there where we can look at the
objects that are in memory so if we look
at the first snapshots that I collected
which was right before I run the garbage
collection in my codes you will see that
in the objects I actually have of type
sample disposable there's 10,000 of
those so my code works as expected
I actually allocated 10,000 of those
objects and I expect them to be disposed
at a later point in time then in my
codes
I ran the GC collect and expected those
objects to be gone from memory and in
fact if we look at the objects in these
snapshots and we search again for our
sample disposable we see that only the
list is there and the internal array of
that list and our sample disposables
seem gone well actually they are not
gone if we look at the automatic
inspections in that memory here we will
see that instead of having them in the
garbage or in having them collected my
sample disposables have moved to the
finalizer Q so the garbage collector ran
moved all these objects into a different
sets into a different Q basically saying
okay look I cannot yet clean them up but
I'll cue them when I run next and I will
clean them up then so the objects are
actually still in memory the garbage
collector has to run clean up twice in
this case it has to run them first to
collect everything and move into the
finalizer queue but only on the next
step the finalize a queue will be
emptied and and basically the objects
will be removed from memory so that's
not ideal so let's look at our source
code again and see if we can write a
better way so right now we implement I
disposable and what our dispose will do
is it will dispose of the file stream
that I'm referencing
and it will also dis or free the integer
pointer that I had allocated earlier
basically helping the garbage collector
to see that I no longer have any
outgoing references to other objects in
my own objects well if I use this one
and I run my code again where I again
allocates ten thousands of those sample
disposables then I actually call the
dots dispose methods to clean up the
references that I have in there and only
then run the garbage collection we will
see in the profiler that the objects
will be removed from memory so let's
look at that as well so in my snapshots
that I have here I have a snapshots that
I took right after allocating those
10,000 objects and you will see that
again I have 10,000 of those objects in
memory so my code works I actually
allocated 10,000 objects then I called
dot dispose on all of them and if we
then look at our final snapshot right
after running one garbage collection
cycle we will see that there's no more
sample disposables in memory and also if
we look at the automatic inspections in
the profiler here we will see that the
finalizar queue is actually empty so
instead of having to endure two garbage
collection cycles by just implementing
disposable correctly I made it easier on
the garbage collector to only run once
or have to run once instead of having to
run twice on this collection rights so
helping the garbage collector will
really help in having less pauses or
less work for the garbage collector in
your application now let's look at when
we are actually allocating coats in our
application typically when we're using
value types like integers boolean
structs spans of T and things like that
we're not allocating those on the heap
so the garbage collector will not run
for those they are allocated on the
stack and there's a session later today
that will cover probably a lot of those
things there so that's that's perfectly
fine but whenever we are using reference
types whenever we knew something
whenever you use say an ioc container
that creates an object for us or
activator that create instance or
something like that whenever we're
creating a reference type we are
allocating something in the managed heap
and the garbage collector will
eventually have to
check that object and see if it can be
removed from memory the good thing is
when we look through our code whenever
we see a new we know we are allocating
something probably on the heap the
problem is there's also hidden
allocations in that nets I don't know
who was in Dena's talk this morning she
talked a little bit about boxing while
boxing is one case where you're actually
having a value type but your boxing it
putting it in box of a reference type
and you're allocating a reference type
for debts that basically just contains a
pointer to the original objects but
still you're allocating on the heap and
the garbage collector will have to run
for that so a nice example here is we
have the integer we make it into an
object well that means we now have
something on the stack as well as on the
heap that will have to be collected at
some points if you look at lambdas and
closures and tasks dots and tasks and
async/await and so on there's lots of
hidden allocations happening there if
you use params erase you will see hidden
allocations there as well and there's a
couple of more cases out there as well
now how do you find those hidden
allocations well typically if you run
into a problem you learn from that
problem and you will hopefully never
make that mistake again
you can look at the intermediate
language to see what is going on and
where hidden allocations are happening
you could of course use a profiler and
see whatever is happening in your
application or you can use one of the
plugins either furry Sharper or just for
visual studio without resharper let's
tell you whenever you are making a
hidden allocation those two plugins are
really nice to look into those things
but just for fun let's look at some
intermediate language code and see what
happens under the covers of dotnet when
we are writing some codes so let me
close that close that demo as well and
then open this one so what I have here
is a very simple class that has a couple
of examples where I'm allocating things
and the nice thing is if you have
resharper installed you can where is my
tool window I can search for the il
viewer and there should be a two window
called il viewer and the il viewer two
window give me the il code for the
that I select so let me maybe open this
one in a separate window so whenever I
select a statement here
you will see that the statement is also
selected in the il viewer so it makes it
really easy to map my c-sharp codes to
whatever I am saying in the il codes so
what we have here is we are boxing so
whenever we are putting this integer
inside this reference type of box we are
boxing and you will see in the source
code that's there's a box statement and
the book statement really converts a
value type into a reference type so that
was an easy hidden allocation to find if
we look at the il code there we see this
thing is being boxed and we should
hopefully find a better way of writing
that codes now another one that I really
like is this one I think we all write
codes where we have a method that has
that takes a params array of some
objects and then does something with
that right I think we all write code
like this now what happens when you call
that methods without actually passing in
any variables into that methods well it
turns out that if you look at the aisle
codes that we are actually creating a
new array of type string an empty one
and then pass that into our methods that
we just wrote and that expects a params
array so while we may think that we're
not passing any variables and not
creating any allocations in memory we
are actually allocating a new area of
type string that will be passed and has
to be reclaimed by the garbage collector
again it may not matter but if you have
lots of these allocations the garbage
collector will have to will probably be
invoked and we'll run a garbage
collection which may eventually pause
your application while it's running
let's look at another example we move
down on a side a little bit more imagine
I have a methods average within bounce
that takes an input array a minimum and
a maximum and then runs a link statement
on that that basically takes all the
numbers from my input array between the
minimum and the maximum and then calls
dot average on that one that's perfectly
fine code it's it's nice and readable so
it looks perfectly fine now the thing
with this one is that if we look at the
i/o
koats we can actually see that right
before I create my linked statements we
are actually creating a new object in
intermediate language codes of the type
display class tree and we are storing
two integers in that objects namely the
minimum and the maximum the thing is we
are capturing the values of the minimum
and the maximum because in between here
some things could happen to my code and
I want to store the actual minimum and
the maximum that I received when this
method was first called and when this
query was set up and only when the
average runs I will actually use those
variables so the reason for that or the
the reasons for this hidden class and
the capturing of the values is that
anything can happen in between here but
I still want to have the original
minimum and maximum when I call the
average method in there so that's a
hidden allocation and again if you have
a lot of those you could incur some
garbage collection when it's not
actually needed so probably this could
be a really nice one to rewrite with a
simple for loop and pick the right
variables and then do the average of
that one and not use link in this case
there's a couple more if you do tasks
for example if you say a test run there
will be a lambda created here well that
lambda will also at some point create a
new new objects of type display class
for in this case again a compiler
generated class and an object
instantiation that I have here that will
store some of the variables that I will
need when I'm running this lambda later
on so all hidden allocations and some of
those we don't actually need in our code
and could probably be rewritten to make
the work on the garbage collector a
little bit easier and why is my toolbox
initializing yeah okay so back to slides
I'll have to find them here yeah
so we've seen hidden allocations but I
want to make a little side note here I'm
a talk to you about not doing those
hidden allocations or optimizing your
params arrays or rewriting linked to for
statements and so on it may not even
matter in your codes if something like
that happens and is only called one
the garbage collector will run happily
and will be perfectly fine in cleaning
up the memory that you have so don't do
premature optimization don't go home and
rewrite all your linked statements into
regular loops always measure always
profile and see whatever is happening in
your codes there's a couple of things
that you will need to know before you
start optimizing and that is how
frequently are you allocating if it's
millions of times per seconds then maybe
you want to look into optimizing nets
how frequently is the garbage collector
running if it runs every second or every
half a second you probably want to
optimize that as well what generation do
our objects end on that's also an
important one if garbage collection is
always on gen zero it will be perfectly
fine because gen zero is typically for
objects that have not a lot of
references
so garbage collector will be pretty fast
on that one and also are the allocations
in the collections introducing pauses is
the fact that we allocated a lot of
memory causing pauses by the garbage
collector or not that's also something
you want to know you could use profilers
for debts but those four metrics you can
also get them from performance counters
in Windows so if you just want to look
at how your application is behaving
first look at those and if those reveal
something that worries you then start
profiling maybe but don't go prematurely
optimizing all the code that you have
right I have another demo here where I
say always be measuring always look into
the different things that you have
profile your codes and look at improving
things I don't know if you know this
application it's called untapped who is
on untappd any beer lovers here ok a
couple of people I found here in Kiev
that there's not a lot of people using
untappd so the data sets is another
ideal but the idea of this app is that
whenever I drink a beer I check it in I
rate the beer I tell people where I
drank this beer so that's other people
using this app can find nice beers
wherever they are there's a nice feature
for that in the application also for me
it's really nice because when you go to
a bar and you check in something I will
see what beery drank what he thought
about it so I may actually start trying
some other beers now this one on the
right is a Belgian beer that I really
like
a lot it's my only 5 out of 5 stars on
untappd and what I wanted to do was
create a similar application that
requires a lot of data and that stores
ratings of different beers and breweries
so I have a big JSON file Visual Studio
crashes when I open it
notepad plus plus takes five minutes to
open the file and there's basically no
way to really look at that thing other
than just tailing and and taking chunks
of this file the file contains I think
all of the Belgian beers that exist a
couple of American ones and so on and
the structure is like this it's a big
JSON array that contains objects that
have the name of the beer that have the
name of the brewery that have the number
of votes and the average rating for that
number of votes so that I have some
information that I could display my
application so let's see how we could
load that into memory if we look at our
unoptimized version yes so we will see
that I created an insane version of
loading all these beers into memory
basically what I want to have in my
application is a dictionary of beers
where for every brewery I store the
beers and their rating so that I can
reuse this at a later point in time in
my application so what I do here is
really insane don't do this I load the
entire beers that Jason into memory as a
string then parse it into a JSON array
and then start populating my dictionary
I hope all of you see that this is
probably an insane way of loading this
big file into memory because in fact I'm
loading this big file three times in
memory and and some additional things as
well
I'm loading the entire string I'm
creating a big JSON array with all the
objects representing all the things that
are in this string and then I'm filling
my dictionary and storing them again so
this is probably not a good way of doing
things and I hope you understand that
without having to profile here now I
created a second version that is more
optimized so in this case same
dictionary breweries all their beers and
all their ratings but what I do in this
case is I use a JSON text
that basically streams the Jason into my
application and whenever I encounter an
object I know the structure of my
bierstadt Jason whenever I see an object
I load just that object into memory then
look at the brewery name the beer name
and the rating and then starts adding it
into my dictionary so that's a nice coat
of loading things and now I'm not
loading the entire file as a string I'm
just loading parts of this file into
memory and that should be more optimized
the important thing to see here is that
whenever I load the beers I'm creating a
new dictionary why well I just want the
new beers and if the ratings have been
updated I want to have those in the
dictionary so if we profile that
application you will see that the chart
of memory usage is kind of interesting
so first of all you see the beers being
loaded you see lots and lots of
allocations happening a lot of those
allocations go to generation - well
that's perfectly fine because I'm
storing this in a dictionary that is
static and that will live forever in my
application so it's kind of expected
that things will end up on generation 2
the interesting thing though is I took a
snapshot here when I first loaded all
these objects into memory then I waited
a little bit and I reloaded to the
objects in memory which meant that I had
my original dictionary but also in the
meanwhile a new dictionary was filling
up and only when that one was filled up
I discard the old one and I could reuse
the new one in my application as you can
see that's not ideal because we're
basically spending lots and lots of
memory there and there's also lots of
memory traffic going on and imagine
parsing a few ten thousands of beers
that come from this JSON file that's a
big allocation and it's almost
guaranteed well it's actually visible as
well that the garbage collector will run
and have to clean up those things and
maybe even pause my application so let's
see if we can optimize this thing so we
profiled we looked at the chart there
and we saw that there's a lot of memory
traffic going on and in fact I cannot
scroll in there but just believe me
there's lots of memory traffic and
that's in using garbage collection now
we could rewrite our code a little bit
and instead of allocating a new B
arrey every time we start loading this
this JSON file we could also just reuse
the existing one so I have an optimized
version which is almost the same the
only thing I'm doing is checking if the
object is already stored in memory if it
is I just replaced the rating and maybe
the number of votes reason for that is I
don't think there's gonna be a new beer
every five minutes whenever I would load
these goats and I also don't think that
it really matters that the number of
votes and the rating is real time so
every five minutes for example I could
load this into memory and just reuse
what I already had and just update a
couple of values in doing so we can see
in the profiler let's go back the
optimized one we can see in a profiler
that the memory usage here is much more
flat okay there's the initial loads that
happens but whenever I trigger a reload
at some points which happens here I
think the memory is pretty much flat it
only scans all the objects that are in
memory and there's some updates and
that's it it doesn't spend too many
allocations and it doesn't even induce
much garbage collection there because of
the fact that I'm just updating and
reusing the existing objects in memory
the point that I want to make here is
that it may make sense in your
application to reuse objects and
eventually reuse dictionaries and
collections and so on because that may
mean that you're doing fewer allocations
in my case here the shape of my
dictionary would probably be the same
the only thing that I would want to have
is updated ratings and updated number of
votes so all the rest could be the same
I could reuse the collection and even
the objects that are in my collection
there it's called the object pool
pattern if you don't know this one
there's a nice article on that I think
David Fowler also wrote a nice blog post
on how they use object pooling in
asp.net core if you want to read up on
that and if you just want a pool of
objects that you can reuse the system
that buffers that array pool is a really
nice one where you can recycle arrays
instead of reallocating arrays whenever
you need them
right so in summary the garbage
collector is optimized for high memory
traffic and lots of short-lived objects
so use that knowledge don't fear
allocations it may be perfectly fine to
allocate lots and lots of objects in
your codes when the garbage collector
can collect them easily and early it
doesn't even matter so don't just go and
optimize always measure your application
and how it is behaving and know when
allocations happen and based on that
knowledge look into whether you should
optimize this thing or not
now let's take a different angle and
let's explore the heap let's see what
dotnet is actually storing in memory to
see how how your application or your
memory space works so how would you
build something like dotnet samanage
type system that is stored in memory of
a computer and that is both CPU and
memory friendly how would you build
something like that well probably you
would go with something that resembles a
relational database you would probably
have a table that stores information
about the type I have a class named
person this person has three properties
name a first name last name and maybe H
first name is a string last name is a
string
H is an integer information about the
types that you have in memory then you
would probably have another table that
just contains the values so for my
person there would be the value Martin
Bal my age and I could run a query that
basically links the values and the type
information together whenever I'm
running my application so you get some
sort of a relational database to build
something like that probably you'll have
another table that stores method
pointers like where can I get for
example the create new person or the
constructor of this type object and so
on and some other inheritance things for
example like how is the type structured
is personal subclass of something in the
application things like that well it
turns out Donuts works very very similar
to that structure so if you push stuff
on the stack not managed by the garbage
collector whenever you allocate
something what you will get back is an
instance ID dotnet will work
that instanceid and follow that
instanceid to a pointer with the values
that live on the stack so that's
something that happens in there for
everything on the heap you will see some
table structure you also get an instance
ID that points to a table that contains
just the values of your type as well as
a pointer to another table that contains
the type information and the methods and
so on that are in the type that you are
making use of so that's nice
dotnet really works like a relational
database internally it has different
tables that are linked together now
theories nice let's see if we can
actually explore this method table or
explore this table in memory and see
whatever is happening in there there's a
nice new kit package called Microsoft
Diagnostics of runtime that you can use
for this or CLR MD which was the
codename I think for that one and it
allows you to attach to a running
process pause the world to pause the
entire application and see what is in
memory my short definition of that one
is linked to heap because you can
actually query what is in memory at some
point in time so let's look into CLR MD
visual studio there so I have a solution
here that has two projects one is the
one that I will be using to explore what
is in memory and the other one is a
target application that I will run to do
something so my target application is
quite simple all it does is write
something to console create a timer
creates a type that I created called
clock and whenever the clock ticks this
method is executed and I write the
current date time to console and
basically almost immediately after
allocating my clock
I run garbage collection and I expect my
clock to become from memory etc so if
you run this this is the most boring
demo application ever but if you run
this you will see it shows up on this
screen you will see that it's print
something it runs a collection and even
after the collection it's still running
my timer so you already see something is
wrong with this application but just to
give you an idea I have an application
that prints the time awesome
then in my other projects what I'm doing
is I'm basically starting my demo
application and what that does is it
simply opens the application and gives
me back the process so I have a process
ID that I can work with and when I run
it I start the other application I wait
for a couple of seconds and after that
wait I attach CLR MD to the run to the
running process so attaching to the
running process works based on the
process ID so I needed the process ID
there and I'll wait 10 seconds for it to
attach in case it takes a while to
attach now one important flag that I'm
passing in to CLR MV is the fact that
I'm attaching in an invasive manner
whenever I want to explore the memory
space it would be very very unhandy and
very difficult for me to analyze what is
going on in the application if the
application would still be running the
garbage collector would be running
memory could change and so on
so bypassing this invasive flag I'm
actually telling the run time pause the
world's boss everything and give me a
static representation of what is in the
application so that I can reason about
that one
so let's maybe just run it and see what
comes out so my CLR MD process will
start my actual application will start
as well and as you can see after about
two seconds I attach to it and you see
the application really being passed and
the date time is no longer printed to
consult there because I use this
invasive flag now in source codes what I
can do is I can use this data targets
that I get from CLR MV to inspect lots
and lots of things that are in the
runtime so the first thing that I could
look at is for example the CLR info
which version of the CLR am i reviewing
using to run this specific application
it gives me back the version in this
case net 4.7 as well as the DAC file
that's a data access file look at it
like the data layer - from runtime
towards the actual stuff that is in
memory so every single version of.net
has this DAC file that you have to use
anyone has used windbg and SOS before
a couple of people this file you would
normally have to load as well
what CLR MD does for you is download the
correct file to work with so it's
actually easier than working with windbg
now other things that I can do is dump
runtime info so what I can do is explore
my data targets and dump for example the
number of threads that I have and for
every treads check if it's a background
thread or a foreground threads and then
print the entire stack trace of that
treads so let's do that and run it we'll
get all the threads that are running in
my demo application there's a background
thread that does a console dot readline
at some points and I have some other
background threads I don't know what
they are doing but they're there other
stuff that I can do here is for example
dump the objects that are on the heap
now that's a really impressive one
actually I can get all the objects that
are in memory of my running application
I get back the different generations I
can look at what's engine zero Gen 1 Gen
2 and so on and get information about
the objects so the way this works is
that for my heap I can enumerate all the
object addresses this initial pointer
that I had in a table then for every
pointer I can get the object type make
the link to this other table that has
the type information and whenever I
actually have a type I can call type dot
get value for this specific object
address and then I will navigate yet
another table to get the actual values
of the objects that I have in here the
nice thing is for simple objects like
strings I can just print strings to cons
also you will see for every string you
will see the value in there as well and
for more complicated objects I would
have to do some things to read the
actual values in the object but it's
doable using this approach where you
navigate from pointer of the object to
the type to the values that are in the
type right let's look at another one I
could also dump string duplicates so I
could look into memory and look at
duplicate strings in my memory space so
if we run this one you will see that
there are a lot of string duplic
it's in a default application so you'll
see there are 16 usages of the month of
May in Dutch I don't know why there are
16 instances of that one in memory but
they are in memory for my very simple
hello world application and and so on
the way this one works is pretty similar
to the previous one again I enumerate
all the addresses that I have then I get
the object type if it's a string I just
count the number of strings I get the
value of my string and then add them
into a dictionary of unique strings and
set the number plus one so then I can
count the occurrences of this one
there's another one that I can do and
that is dumping retention of objects in
my memory space so let's quickly jump
back to the profiler and let's me first
look at the source code again so in here
I actually created a memory leak I think
a lot of you will spot the memory leak
that I created here even though I'm
expecting this class to be disposed at
some point and be collected by the
garbage collector whenever it runs there
is still a timer that references my own
tick and I should actually close my
timer or dispose my timer as well if I
want the object to disappear from memory
this is very very visible if you look at
it in a profiler if we would take a
snapshot of my object you will see that
my clock is still in memory because
there's a timer callback linking my
clock and it's in memory because of
deaths well the thing is with CLR MV I
can write similar codes that dumps the
retention path to my clock and you will
see that my clock is being held in
memory by a timer callback a timer cue
helper in the timer queue and I could
even chart this and show a nice charts
of what's the retention path to my clock
looks like if you use any charting
library so that's kind of nice to work
with the way this one works is slightly
more complicated but the idea is that in
my program here again I enumerate the
heap I first tried to find my clock so
whenever I find my clock where is the
code there
should be in there anyway let's search
for clocks so whenever I have an object
that matches my clock type name I will
start enumerate in the entire heap and
basically built the tree of objects that
are pointing to my objects to that
object and so on and so on to basically
get that information that the profiler
gives me as well now you may be
wondering what's the use of that it's
it's all nice it's nice and geeky and I
can look into the memory space but why
would I do that well turns out that
having that programmatic insight into
your memory space can be quite useful
you can attach to any running process or
you could use CLR MV to attach to a dump
file for example and you could check
whether an object is still in memory
where you expected it to be reclaimed by
the garbage collector so for example if
you have a memory leak at some points
you could analyze the memory leak then
write a unit test that uses CLR MD or
something else to check whether the fix
that you are creating will actually
solve that memory leak and then
programmatically check it every time you
have a test run going on so that you can
be sure that you're not really
reintroducing a new memory leak later on
CLR on this one way to do that there's
another way that is that dot memory
units that's one that we use in sites
jetbrains I have a nice blog post there
where the idea is that you can write a
unit test and let's try to zoom in a
little bit where you can write a unit
test that basically captures the memory
snapshots snapshots and just like in a
profiler gets the objects from my
snapshots checks if the type is a clock
counts the objects and then checks if
the clock was actually removed from
memory at the point that I wanted to
remove this one so that's another way of
doing this but if you're really into CLR
MV you can write something like this
yourself as well so in conclusion the
garbage collector is optimized for high
memory traffic and short-lived objects
so use that knowledge use the garbage
collector don't fear allocations because
I told you to fear them it's perfectly
fine very often but if you suspect
something is wrong
or you see Gentoo pauses or things like
that then you could start analyzing
measuring using a profiler using things
like CLR MD and so on and look into how
you could optimize your code but don't
prematurely optimize with that I have a
tip for a next talk there's another one
by a nickel a later today that we'll
explore more of the stack side of things
so go there if you're interested in this
topic and if not thank you for being
here and enjoy lunch later on Thanks any
questions thank you and I have two
questions probably first question why
why three generations why not four or
five and so on there are a lot of
information but basically it's not
really clear how it was calculated and
second one so as I understood it you can
basically attach to any process and
serve memory in data so what if I don't
want if someone will if I'm right in a
computer game right I don't want anyone
to attach and treat some data and so on
how how I can protect my application
thank you so on your first question on
why are there three generations I think
it's just an arbitrary number that's
Microsoft in this case chose it could be
five it could be ten but if it would be
ten for example someone in the audience
would ask me why are there ten
generations so they just decided on a
number I guess and I think it also sort
of makes sense where you have
short-lived objects medium term where
after two collections the object could
be reclaimed and then everything else it
gives a nice balance I think between CPU
usage and the number of times that the
garbage collector has to actually pause
your application to run garbage
collection on the second question how do
you prevent people from attaching to
your memory space nuts so whenever you
run your application it's running in
your
and that net gives you the entry points
into that information so it's always
possible for people to do something like
this the only way to prevent that from
happening is running your process
elsewhere so if you have a server
application if it runs there the client
can not reach out to the memory space of
the server there but it's it's always
possible to attach